---
title: Setup Private Key p12 File
hide_table_of_contents: false
---

<head>
  <title>Setup Private Key P12 file</title>
  <meta
    name="description"
    content="This document will help to create a p12 file private key file necessary to join the network."
  />
</head>

### Create or Transfer a P12 private key file

##### We are ready to setup or Node's wallet which will be done directly on our instance.

The below 👇 definitions table shows the assumptions that are made in order to follow along with the `step-by-step` documentation in this repository.  If you had decided to **change** anything during the course of your build, you will need to substitute those changes as necessary. made during the step-by-step below, you will need to change these to match your configuration, if you decide to **change** anything we that suggested in this documentation.

| Variable |	Value |
| -------- | ------ |
| Cloud instance hostname |	**node-garage**. Your instance will **not** have the same hostname. Substitute `node-garage` with whatever your instance has been called during setup |
| User we will work with or add |	**nodeadmin** |
| [...] | When you see this in our examples, it will mean that there may be extra output from a command issued. The output is not important for our purposes, so it is redacted. The symbol will be shown above the code that is important or below the code that is important. |

#### INSTRUCTIONS

From your **local system**, log into your **cloud instance's** terminal as **nodeadmin** using your Apple terminal, Window's PuTTY, or your terminal application of choice.

:::note
You can remind yourself how to access your VPS here for [Macintosh](../accessMac) or [Windows](../accessWin).
:::

Bring our Node up to date

```
sudo apt -y update && sudo apt -y upgrade
```

You will be prompted for your nodeadmin password.
:::warning
Your screen will not react and your password will not show as you type.  
**Reminder**: `[...]` in the output command examples means that there is a bunch of output that has been redacted to eliminate confusion. 
:::
```
[sudo] password for nodeadmin:
[...]
```

**Create** a directory in your user's home directory to hold some **`Tessellation files`**.
```
cd ~
mkdir tessellation
```

Let's remind ourselves what our Node's **external IP** address is (copy it for later).
```
curl -s https://ipv4.icanhazip.com/
```

:::danger IMPORTANT
It is **NOT RECOMMENDED** to use a **p12** file that is already in use for other purposes. You should create a new clean p12.
If you still insist, and you have an existing .p12 file, you can `SFTP` the file over to your Node.
:::

### Existing P12 transfer
Place your existing **`.p12`** file in your `tessellation directory`.
```
/home/nodeadmin/tessellation
```

### Create a **NEW** P12 private key file

:::danger DANGER
Do **not** use the same passphrases of existing Nodes on Constellation, or any other Nodes from other projects. 
This is **dangerous** and **bad practice**. 

You need to store your `passphrases` **securely**. 

If you `lose` your **p12** credentials, there is **nothing** that can be done.
:::

Click [here](../password) to get an explanation of passphrases verses passwords.

#### Create **Passphrase**

We now need to create our **passphrase** for our `.p12 wallet` on our `Node`. 

:::tip IMPORTANT
Our passphrase should be at least `10` or more characters.
:::

:::tip
<div>Contains more than 1 special characters</div>
<div>Contains more than 1 Capital letter</div>
<div>Contains more than 1 Lowercase letters</div>
<div>Contains more than 1 Numbers</div>
<div>Do not use quotes " in your passphrase. (Advanced users can escape quotes.)</div>
:::

:::tip **IMPORTANT**
<div>Do not use special character $ in your passphrase. (Advanced users can attempt to escape.)</div>
<div>Do not use recognizable words</div>
:::

:::danger IMPORTANT
Do not use the same passphrase (or other details) in the example below 👇! But, you can use something similar to the example below 👇
:::

We need to create some environment variables that will be used during the lifetime of the node. We will create a bash script for this purpose, and give it the name **cn-node**. We will come back to this script to update it later on during our configuration process.

For ease of usage, we will use **Linux Nano Editor** for this process, if you are a more advanced user, you can use **Vim**, or any other editor of your choice.

```
sudo nano /usr/local/bin/cn-node
```

:::info
How to use the `nano` text editor is out of scope of this document; however, you can read up on how to create, edit and save a document at this link:  [How to Use Nano, the Linux Command Line Text Editor](https://linuxize.com/post/how-to-use-nano-text-editor/)
:::

You will need:
- Your `external IP address` of your Node. (Marked down at the beginning steps above 👆)
- You will create a `name` that you would like to call your `p12` file.
- You will create a `passphrase` you came up with using requirements above 👆.
- You will create an `alias` that you would like to use against your `.p12` file and the life of your Node.  Your alias is **public** facing.

:::info Developer Note
The Key passphrase `CL_KEYPASS` has been changed to `CL_PASSWORD`, for the **.p12** creation process.
:::

:::tip REMINDER 
Do not use the same passphrase, alias, or p12 files name as in the examples here.

We have created our Node with the **nodeadmin** username. If you agreed and used the same, that is the only variable that should be kept the same as the examples below.
:::

#### Understanding the environment variables
| Variable | Value	| Instructions |
| --- | --- | --- |
| Node Username | nodeadmin | If you used this `name` for your `user` while you followed these instructions, that is perfect, no need to change this variable in the example below . You will use this in the path of `CL_KEYSTORE` variable line. |
| CL_EXTERNAL | 111.111.111.111 | Our Node's remote `IP address` |
| CL_KEYSTORE | myconstellation.p12 | This will be placed at the end of the path `CL_KEYSTORE` line in the file.
| CL_KEYALIAS | myConstellationAlias | Do **not** use this example, come up with your own. |
| CL_EXTERNAL |111.111.111.111 | Our Node's (remote) `external IP address`. We reminded ourselves about this early on this page... See above |

Create a `text` file that will be saved as a bash shell script.  When executed this will add some environment variables to your local environment where the script was run, these environment variables are **ephemeral** per user session.  

:::note
This process may be deprecated in the near future; however, it is good to have in place for now.
:::

You can use a text editor that comes standard with most flavors of Debian `nano`.

Change directories to `/usr/local/bin`
```
cd /usr/local/bin
```

We will be creating our `cn-node` file as super user (sudo)

:::note Nano Quick Notes
 - `sudo nano cn-cnode` will start the program
 - use your keyboard arrows to navigate (not your mouse)
 - ctrl-o command-o (letter o) will save the contents of the file
 - give the file a name (`cn-node`)
 - ctrl-x command-x to exit the editor
:::

Add the following to our `cn-node` text file
```
#!/bin/bash
export CL_EXTERNAL_IP=111.111.111.111
export CL_KEYALIAS="myConstellationAlias"
export CL_KEYSTORE="/home/nodeadmin/tessellation/myconstellation.p12"
export CL_APP_ENV="testnet"
export CL_PUBLIC_HTTP_PORT=9000
export CL_P2P_HTTP_PORT=9001
```

When your file looks mostly similar to the above 👆. You will use *Nano Quick Notes* above 👆 to save the file out.

We want to make this file **executable**.

```
sudo chmod +x /usr/local/bin/cn-node
```

Run the bash script we just created by sourcing with the **`.`** so that it runs in our environment.

:::note
In this example we are connecting to **testnet**
:::

```
. cn-node
```

Let's check that the environment variables were added to our current shell environment. Your results may not be the in the same order, this doesn't matter.

```
env | grep CL_
```

Result
```
CL_EXTERNAL_IP=111.111.111.111
CL_KEYALIAS=myConstellationAlias
CL_KEYSTORE=/home/nodeadmin/tessellation/myconstellation.p12
CL_APP_ENV=testnet
CL_PUBLIC_HTTP_PORT=9000
CL_P2P_HTTP_PORT=9001
```

#### Last Step
:::danger IMPORTANT
We do **not** want to have our p12 **passphrase** added to a static plain text file.  Our **p12** file is our private key file that stores valuable information.  If the passphrase is exposed, you can have access to the MainNet, State Channel, TestNet, etc. compromised, including access to wallets.  This is a **bad** idea.
:::

Instead, we will create a *temporary* environment variable prior to building our **p12** file.  The export we do below will only survive the current working session, and it will be lost after we log out.  

```
export CL_PASSWORD="place_your_passphrase_here"
```

:::info REMEMBER
Please be sure to follow the passphrase guidelines above 👆 and place your passphrase between the `"` (quotes).
:::

### CREATE OUR .P12 FILE
Change directories to our dedicated tessellation folder.

```
cd ~/tessellation
```

Generate your p12 private key file.
:::note
We will **not** use the `sudo` command here.  This will create our `p12` file with the ownership belonging to `nodeadmin`
:::

```
java -jar /var/tessellation/cl-keytool.jar generate
```

Let's verify that we have a .p12 file.

:::info DO NOT WORRY
The size and dates may not match, this doesn't matter.
:::

:::note
The 2 l are the lower-case letter `L` not the number 1 (ls -l)
:::

```
ls -l
```

Result
```
[...]
-rw-rw-r-- 1 nodeadmin nodeadmin 1110 Oct 28 21:38 myconstellation.p12
[...]
```

:::danger Important 
Change the permissions of this file so only you can read and write to it.
:::
```
chmod 600 ~/tessellation/myconstellation.p12
ls -l
```
Result
```
[...]
-rw------- 1 nodeadmin nodeadmin 1110 Oct 28 21:38 myconstellation.p12
[...]
```

After a good amount of work and effort, we have our **`.p12`** file!

GREAT JOB!